---
Title: How-to-paper
Author: Wyatt Eaton
Date: 9-25-18
Type: How to paper
---

    When you look at a calf, what do you see? Beside the cute face and adorableness of a newborn animal, you see an animal. Now, how old is that newborn? Who is their mother, their father, or have they been vaccinated for newborn diseases? Better yet, what is that animal's name? I would like to explain and go over protocols for processing a calf, and registering it, so we can answer all these questions and help the calf grow into a strong and healthy animal. This process is typical for newborns, and at the College of the Ozarks beef farm, our cattle are registered. This means that all our cattle have names, numbers, and records of everything they have had done. There are four main steps in total for processing a calf. The first is to access, second is to process, third is to record information, and lastly is registration. Once you have completed these steps, you will have a completely processed calf. 

    The first, and most crucial, step when processing calves is to watch the mother and her newborn. You do not want to process the calf if it has amniotic fluid on it. Amniotic fluid is what nurtures the calf in the mother's womb. Being wet with this fluid means that the mother has not had enough time to lick her baby clean of the amniotic fluid and she has not had enough time to bond with her calf. When it comes to the wellbeing of the calf, the mother to calf bond is detrimental. If there is no bond, then the mother will not take care of the calf. When approaching the pair, approach carefully. If you are close enough to see if the calf has amniotic fluid on it, then your close enough for the mother to hurt you. If the mother lets you approach and the calf is dry, then you can begin processing. 
  
    The second step is a long step; it is processing the calf. In this step, it does come in handy to have someone else help. They can hand equipment over or help hold the calf. Better yet, they can watch the mother while processing. Before processing, run a mental checklist before you get to the calf to make sure you have all your gear ready. What is needed are a scale for weight, screwworm spray, a tagger with a tag, two generic vaccines for newborn calves, and a book with a pen for records. The calf then gets a vaccine via the nose and mouth, a tag in their left ear for identification, get its' weight, spray for screwworm, and get the gender of the calf. The vaccines help the calf fight off newborn diseases while boosting its' immunity to future diseases. The tag will have a College of the Ozarks stamp on it as well as a number for easy identification. The weight and gender of the calf are for records and the screwworm spray helps keeps flies off the naval and posterior end of the calf. From this step, and for records, you will need to write down the calf's tag number, weight, and gender. Now you are ready to insert information into records. 
  
    The third step is recording information. Records are vital in determining the direction of your operation. It is crucial for the registration of your animal. To fill the records, you need to get the cows condition, score the udder and teats, determine calving ease, enter in all the information about the calf previously recorded, and include sire number. A cow's condition is what the animal looks like after calving, for example: is she fat, skinny, or in between? The scoring scale is from one through nine with a seven being ideal. To score an udder with teats, it is close to the conditioning score, does it look too big, small, or in between. The scoring scale for teats and udders are also from one to nine, with a five being ideal.  Calving ease is just asking if she did, or did not, need help during the time of parturition, or birth. Then after the previous calf information is recorded, include the sire number (sire means father). The main reason for the sire number to be included is to see what his genetic background has in it. This helps determine the calf's future success. 
  
    Lastly, registering the calf is the final step. All of this information recorded from the mother, father, and newborn create the baby's final step in processing. All the data is filled out on a special form and sent off to the registration association where they will look over and accept the calf's pedigree. A pedigree is a data sheet that tells the past, present, and future of that animal. A 'how to paper' could be wrote on how to read pedigrees and expected progeny differences, so this is a very basic idea of what pedigrees can tell. Pedigrees are important because it lists all the traits of that calf, help determine how productive the calf will be, and it lets anyone see who that calf really is. In any registered herd, you must have pedigrees to sell with your animal. 

    When processing calves, please be careful. Thoroughly access whether the calf and mother are ready for processing. This is imperative for you safety and the calf's wellbeing. Make sure all the gear is ready before you process, and be sure to record all the information from the calf while processing. Typically, it is easier to have help when doing this step. After processing, record the mother's characteristics and fathers for future records. No processing is complete until the whole family is there. Lastly, register all the animal's information and then you have completed processing a newborn calf. 
